On this page, you can explore the chemical concentration of PFOS, PFOA, Boron, Calcium Carbonate, and Chloride. 

* Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) was phased out of production in the United States in 2002, but continues to persist in soils and water bodies. It was previously used in non-stick and stain resistant products, food packaging, fire-fighting foam, and for industrial purposes. Exposure to PFOA has been linked with lower birth weights and decreased antibodies in infants, as well as increased cholesterol, increased liver enzymes and higher risk of kidney cancer in adults.  

* Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) was used as a surface protectant in carpets, clothing, paper and cardboard packaging, and firefighting foam until it was phased out of production in 2002. PFOS can enter groundwater through sewage treatment plants, industrial sites, landfills and through firefighting foam. The California State government claims that most California residents have detectable PFOS levels in their blood. High concentrations of PFOS have been linked with prostate, kidney and testicular cancers, as well as birth defects. 

* Calcium Carbonate (CaCO3) is used as an indicator for a water sample’s alkalinity. More alkaline waters have a higher buffering capacity, meaning they can take in relatively more acid without significant change to pH. Alkaline water is also less likely to corrode pipes or have adverse health effects.

* Boron exists in California’s groundwater as boric acid, borax, and boron oxide. It reaches groundwater through the leaching of soils, fertilizer and pesticide use, and wastewater. Boron is lethal at concentrations above 200 mg/kg; and causes nausea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting at levels as low as 20-25 mg/kg. Animal testing studies suggest that boron may have negative effects on reproduction and child development as well. Boron contamination is a growing concern for water supply in Northern California counties: Yolo, San Joaquin, and Contra Costa. 

* Chloride is present in nearly all water sources on Earth, generally as part of an ionic compound with sodium, calcium or magnesium. It is used as an indicator for salinity and for the hardness of water. Fresh surface waters tend to range between 10-20 mg/L of chloride, whereas seawater typically has a chloride concentration near 19,000 mg/L. Human activity causes chloride concentration in groundwater to increase due to wastewater discharged from chemical, pharmaceutical, paper, cement, leather-tanning industries. Chloride in freshwater bodies is harmful to fish and causes corrosion of bridges and other engineering structures. 

